PS-7630 Admin: Add a Contributing Guide for documentation (8.0) (#4253)
percona/percona-server: doc/source/contributing.md

# Contributing Guide

Thank you for deciding to contribute and help us improve Percona Server for MySQL documentation!

> We welcome contributors from all users and community. By contributing, you agree to the [Percona Community code of conduct](https://github.com/percona/community/blob/main/content/contribute/coc/).

Reviewer: I suggest pointing to the live version of that document instead of the git repo:
```suggestion
We welcome contributors from all users and community. By contributing, you agree to the [Percona Community code of conduct](https://percona.community/contribute/coc/).
```

Author: updated.

> We welcome contributors from all users and community. By contributing, you agree to the [Percona Community code of conduct](https://github.com/percona/community/blob/main/content/contribute/coc.md).

Reviewer 2: Lenz suggested replacing it with the web link: https://percona.community/contribute/coc/

Author: Done.

	- Describe the issue you have detected in the Summary, Description, Steps To Reproduce, Affects Version fields.

2. **[Contribute to documentation yourself](#contribute-to-documentation-yourself)**. In the sidebar, there is a **This Page** section. The **Edit in GitHub** link opens the source file of the page on GitHub. There, you make changes, create a pull request that we review and add to the doc project. For details how to do it, read on.

## Contribute to documentation yourself

To contribute to documentation, learn about the following:
- [reStructured text](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/basics.html) markup language. It is used to write the documentation.
- [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/quickstart.html) documentation generator. We use it to convert source ``.rst`` files to html and PDF documents.
- [git](https://git-scm.com/)
- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/). It allows you to run Sphinx in a virtual environment instead of installing it and its dependencies on your machine.

There are several active versions of the documentation. Each version has a branch in the repository named accordingly:
- 5.7
- 8.0

> The .rst files are in the ``source`` directory. 

Reviewer 2: I believe you should give the full path: doc/source

Author: Fixed.

	 - In the *Commit changes* section, describe your changes.
	 - Select the **Create a new branch for this commit and start a pull request** option
	 - Click **Propose changes**.

4. GitHub creates a branch and a commit for your changes. It loads a new page on which you can open a pull request to Percona. The page shows the base branch - the one you offer your changes for, your commit message and a diff - a visual representation of your changes against the original page. At this time you can make a last-minute review. When you are ready, click the **Create pull request** button.
5. Someone from our team reviews the pull request for accuracy and if everything is correct, merges it into the documentation. Then it gets published on the site in the future.

### Edit documentation locally

This option is for users who prefer to work from their computer and/or have the full control over the documentation process.

The steps are the following:

1. Fork this repository
2. Clone the repository on your machine:

```sh
git clone git@github.com:<your_name>/percona-server.git
```

3. Change the directory to ``percona-server/docs`` and add the remote upstream repository:

```sh

> git remote add upstream git@github.com:percona/percona-server.git

Reviewer 2: I believe percona/percona-server = origin
here and below this should be fixed

Author: Fixed.

```

4. Pull the latest changes from upstream

```sh
git fetch upstream
git merge upstream/<branch>
```
Make sure that your local branch and the branch you merge changes from are the same. So if you are on ``5.7`` branch, merge changes from ``upstream/5.7``.

5. Create a separate branch for your changes

```sh
git checkout -b <my_changes>
```

6. Make changes
7. Commit your changes
8. Open a pull request to Percona

### Building the documentation

To verify how your changes look, generate the static site with the documentation. This process is called *building*. You can do it in these ways:
- [Use Docker](#use-docker)
- [Install Sphinx and build locally](#install-sphinx-and-build-locally)

#### Use Docker

1. [Get Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)
2. We use [this Docker image](https://hub.docker.com/r/ddidier/sphinx-doc) to build documentation. Run the following command:

```sh
docker run --rm -i -v `pwd`:/doc -e USER_ID=$UID ddidier/sphinx-doc:0.9.0 make clean html
```
   If Docker can't find the image locally, it first downloads the image, and then runs it to build the documentation.

> 3. Go to the ``build/html`` directory and open the ``index.html`` file to see the documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Go to the ``doc/build/html`` directory and open the ``index.html`` file to see the documentation.
```

Author: Fixed.

4. Your static site will look different from the one on the web site. This difference is because we use a Percona theme that is rendered when the documentation is published on the web. To view the documentation with the Alabaster theme, run the following command:

```sh
docker run --rm -i -v `pwd`:/doc -e USER_ID=$UID ddidier/sphinx-doc:0.9.0 sphinx-build -b html -D 'html_theme=alabaster' source build/html
```

5. To create a PDF version of the documentation, run the following command:

```sh
docker run -i -v `pwd`:/doc -e USER_ID=$UID ddidier/sphinx-doc:0.9.0 make clean latex && docker run -i -v `pwd`:/doc -e USER_ID=$UID ddidier/sphinx-doc:0.9.0 make clean latexpdf
```

> The PDF document is in the ``build/latex`` folder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The PDF document is in the ``doc/build/latex`` folder.
```

Author: Fixed.

# Contributing Guide for Documentation

Thank you for deciding to contribute and help us improve Percona Server for MySQL documentation!

> We welcome contributors from all users and the community. By contributing, you agree to the [Percona Community code of conduct](https://percona.community/contribute/coc/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We welcome contributions from all users and the community. By contributing, you agree to the [Percona Community code of conduct](https://percona.community/contribute/coc/).
```

Author: Fixed.

	- Click the **Submit DOC bug** link on the sidebar. This opens the [Jira issue tracker](https://jira.percona.com/projects/PS/issues) for the doc project.
	- Sign in (create a Jira account if you don’t have one) and click **Create** to create an issue.
	- In the following fields, describe the issue:
		- In the Summary, provide a brief description of the issue
		- In the Description, provide more information about the issue, along with a Steps To Reproduce section, if needed 
		- In the Affects Version/s, if you know this issue affects multiple versions, please enter the version number. It is also permissible to add the version number with an ".x" (such as 8.0.x)

2. **[Contribute to documentation yourself](#contribute-to-documentation-yourself)**. In the sidebar, there is a **This Page** section. The **Edit in GitHub** link opens the source file of the page on GitHub. There, you make changes, create a pull request for us to review. For details how to do it, read on.

## Contribute to documentation yourself

To contribute to documentation, learn about the following:

> - [reStructured text](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/basics.html) markup language. It is used to write the documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [reStructuredText](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/basics.html) markup language. This is the format used to write the documentation.
```

Author: Updated.

- [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/quickstart.html) documentation generator. We use it to convert source ``.rst`` files to html and PDF documents.
- [git](https://git-scm.com/)
- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/). It allows you to run Sphinx in a virtual environment instead of installing it and its dependencies on your machine.

There are several active versions of the documentation. Each version has a branch in the repository named accordingly:

- 5.7
- 8.0

> The .rst files are stored in the ``doc/source`` directory. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``.rst`` files are stored in the ``doc/source`` directory. 
```

Author: Added marks

### Edit documentation online via GitHub

1. Click the **Edit in GitHub** link on the sidebar. The source ``.rst`` file of the page opens in GitHub editor in your browser. If you haven’t worked with the repository before, GitHub creates a [fork](https://docs.github.com/en/github/getting-started-with-github/fork-a-repo) for you.

2. Edit the page. You can check your changes on the **Preview** tab.

>    **NOTE**: GitHub’s native markup language is [Markdown](https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/) which differs from the reStructured text. Therefore, though GitHub renders titles, headings and lists properly, rst-specific elements such as variables, directives, internal links are not rendered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   **NOTE**: GitHub’s native markup language is [Markdown](https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/) which differs from reStructuredText. Therefore, though GitHub renders titles, headings and lists properly, reST-specific elements such as variables, directives, internal links are not rendered.
```

Author: Fixed.

3. Commit your changes.

	 - In the *Commit changes* section, add the following sections:
		 - 	 Add a brief summary (72 characters or less) of what was changed
		 - 	 Add details about why and what changed, if needed. 
	 - 	  Select the **Create a new branch for this commit and start a pull request** option
	 - Click **Propose changes**.

> 4. GitHub creates a branch and a commit for your changes. It loads a new page on which you can open a pull request to Percona. The page shows the base branch - the one you offer your changes for, your commit message and a diff - a visual representation of your changes against the original page. At this time you can make a last-minute review. When you are ready, click the **Create pull request** button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. GitHub creates a branch and a commit for your changes. It loads a new page on which you can submit a pull request to Percona. The page shows the base branch - the one you offer your changes for, your commit message and a diff - a visual representation of your changes against the original page. At this time you can make a last-minute review. When you are ready, click the **Create pull request** button.
```

Author: Updated.

```sh
git fetch origin
git merge origin/<branch>
```
Make sure that your local branch and the branch you merge changes from are the same. So if you are on ``8.0`` branch, merge changes from ``origin/8.0``.

5. Create a separate branch for your changes

```sh
git checkout -b <my_changes>
```

6. Make changes
7. Commit your changes
8. Open a pull request to Percona

### Building the documentation

To verify how your changes look, generate the static site with the documentation. This process is called *building*. You can do it in these ways:
- [Use Docker](#use-docker)
- [Install Sphinx and build locally](#install-sphinx-and-build-locally)

#### Use Docker

1. [Get Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)
2. We use [this Docker image](https://hub.docker.com/r/ddidier/sphinx-doc) to build documentation. Run the following command:

```sh
docker run --rm -i -v `pwd`:/doc -e USER_ID=$UID ddidier/sphinx-doc:0.9.0 make clean html
```
   If Docker can't find the image locally, it first downloads the image, and then runs it to build the documentation.

3. Go to the ``doc/build/html`` directory and open the ``index.html`` file to see the documentation.

> 4. Your static site will look different from the one on the web site. This difference is because we use a Percona theme that is rendered when the documentation is published on the web. To view the documentation with the Alabaster theme, run the following command:

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be the default then, to avoid confusion? I'd suggest to explain the meaning of the `-D 'html_theme=alabaster'` option instead.

Author: rewrote the step.

```sh
docker run --rm -i -v `pwd`:/doc -e USER_ID=$UID ddidier/sphinx-doc:0.9.0 sphinx-build -b html -D 'html_theme=alabaster' source build/html
```

5. To create a PDF version of the documentation, run the following command:

```sh
docker run -i -v `pwd`:/doc -e USER_ID=$UID ddidier/sphinx-doc:0.9.0 make clean latex && docker run -i -v `pwd`:/doc -e USER_ID=$UID ddidier/sphinx-doc:0.9.0 make clean latexpdf
```

> The PDF document is in the ``doc/build/latex`` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting PDF document can be found in the ``doc/build/latex`` folder.
```

Reviewer: What about troubleshooting? How can I check the documentation build for errors?
I think we should encourage contributors to verify their changes locally, to avoid they "break the build".

Author: Rewrote the section to include tips to build

#### Install Sphinx and build locally

1. Install [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/installing/)
2. Install [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/installation.html).
3. While in the root directory of the doc project, run the following command to build the documentation:

```sh
make clean html
```
4. Go to the ``doc/build/html`` directory and open the ``index.html`` file to see the documentation.

> 5. Your static site will look different from the one on the web site. This is because we use a Percona theme that is rendered when the documentation is published on the web. To view the documentation with Alabaster theme, run the following command:

Reviewer: See above.

Author: Fixed.
